Advani, A., M. Goldstein, et al. (2003). "Developing quality indicators and auditing protocols from formal guideline models: knowledge representation and transformations." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 11-5.
	Automated quality assessment of clinician actions and patient outcomes is a central problem in guideline- or standards-based medical care. In this paper we describe a model representation and algorithm for deriving structured quality indicators and auditing protocols from formalized specifications of guidelines used in decision support systems. We apply the model and algorithm to the assessment of physician concordance with a guideline knowledge model for hypertension used in a decision-support system. The properties of our solution include the ability to derive automatically context-specific and case-mix-adjusted quality indicators that can model global or local levels of detail about the guideline parameterized by defining the reliability of each indicator or element of the guideline.

Advani, A., N. Jones, et al. (2004). "An intelligent case-adjustment algorithm for the automated design of population-based quality auditing protocols." Medinfo 11(Pt 2): 1003-7.
	We develop a method and algorithm for deciding the optimal approach to creating quality-auditing protocols for guideline-based clinical performance measures. An important element of the audit protocol design problem is deciding which guide-line elements to audit. Specifically, the problem is how and when to aggregate individual patient case-specific guideline elements into population-based quality measures. The key statistical issue involved is the trade-off between increased reliability with more general population-based quality measures versus increased validity from individually case-adjusted but more restricted measures done at a greater audit cost. Our intelligent algorithm for auditing protocol design is based on hierarchically modeling incrementally case-adjusted quality constraints. We select quality constraints to measure using an optimization criterion based on statistical generalizability coefficients. We present results of the approach from a deployed decision support system for a hypertension guideline.

Advani, A., S. Tu, et al. (1999). "Integrating a modern knowledge-based system architecture with a legacy VA database: the ATHENA and EON projects at Stanford." Proc AMIA Symp: 653-7.
	We present a methodology and database mediator tool for integrating modern knowledge-based systems, such as the Stanford EON architecture for automated guideline-based decision-support, with legacy databases, such as the Veterans Health Information Systems & Technology Architecture (VISTA) systems, which are used nation-wide. Specifically, we discuss designs for database integration in ATHENA, a system for hypertension care based on EON, at the VA Palo Alto Health Care System. We describe a new database mediator that affords the EON system both physical and logical data independence from the legacy VA database. We found that to achieve our design goals, the mediator requires two separate mapping levels and must itself involve a knowledge-based component.

Bosworth, H. B., T. Dudley, et al. (2006). "Racial differences in blood pressure control: potential explanatory factors." Am J Med 119(1): 70 e9-15.
	PURPOSE: Poor blood pressure control remains a common problem that contributes to significant cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, particularly among African Americans. We explored antihypertensive medication adherence and other factors that may explain racial differences in blood pressure control. METHODS: Baseline data were obtained from the Veteran's Study to Improve The Control of Hypertension, a randomized controlled trial designed to improve blood pressure control. Clinical, demographic, and psychosocial factors relating to blood pressure control were examined. RESULTS: A total of 569 patients who were African American (41%) or white (59%) were enrolled in the study. African Americans were more likely to have inadequate baseline blood pressure control than whites (63% vs 50%; odds ratio = 1.70; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.20-2.41). Among 20 factors related to blood pressure control, African Americans also had a higher odds ratio of being nonadherent to their medication, being more functionally illiterate, and having a family member with hypertension compared with whites. Compared with whites, African Americans also were more likely to perceive high blood pressure as serious and to experience the side effect of increased urination compared with whites. Adjusting for these differences reduced the odds ratio of African Americans having adequate blood pressure control to 1.59 (95% confidence interval 1.09-2.29). CONCLUSIONS: In this sample of hypertensive patients who have good access to health care and medication benefits, African Americans continued to have lower levels of blood pressure control despite considering more than 20 factors related to blood pressure control. Interventions designed to improve medication adherence need to take race into account. Patients' self-reports of failure to take medications provide an opportunity for clinicians to explore reasons for medication nonadherence, thereby improving adherence and potentially blood pressure control.

Bosworth, H. B., M. K. Olsen, et al. (2005). "The veterans' study to improve the control of hypertension (V-STITCH): design and methodology." Contemp Clin Trials 26(2): 155-68.
	BACKGROUND: Among the 60 million Americans with hypertension, only approximately 31% have their blood pressure (BP) under control (<140/90 mm Hg). Despite the damaging impact of hypertension and the availability of evidence-based target values for BP, interventions to improve BP control have had limited success. OBJECTIVES: A randomized controlled health services intervention trial with a split-plot design is being conducted to improve BP control. This 4-year trial evaluates both a patient and a provider intervention in a primary care setting among diagnosed hypertensive veterans. METHODS: In a cluster-randomization, 30 primary care providers in the Durham VAMC Primary Care Clinic were randomly assigned to receive the provider intervention or control. The provider intervention is a patient-specific electronically generated hypertension decision support system (DSS) delivering guideline-based recommendations to the provider at each patient's visit, designed to improve guideline-concordant therapy. For these providers, a sample of their hypertensive patients (n=588) was randomly assigned to receive a telephone-administered patient intervention or usual care. The patient intervention incorporates patients' need assessments and involves tailored behavioral and education modules to promote medication adherence and improve specific health behaviors. All modules are delivered over the telephone bi-monthly for 24 months. In this trial, the primary outcome is the proportion of patients who achieve a BP < or =140/90 mm Hg at each outpatient clinic visit over 24 months. CONCLUSION: Despite the known risk of poor BP control, a majority of adults still do not have their BP controlled. This study is an important step in testing the effectiveness of a patient and provider intervention to improve BP control among veterans in the primary care setting.

Bosworth, H. B., M. K. Olsen, et al. (2007). "Hypertension Intervention Nurse Telemedicine Study (HINTS): testing a multifactorial tailored behavioral/educational and a medication management intervention for blood pressure control." Am Heart J 153(6): 918-24.
	BACKGROUND: Only 31% of Americans with hypertension have their blood pressure (BP) under effective control. We describe a study that tests 3 different interventions in a randomized controlled trial using home BP telemedicine monitoring. METHODS: A sample of hypertensive patients with poor BP control at baseline (N = 600) are randomized to 1 of 4 arms: (1) control group--a group of hypertensive patients who receive usual care; (2) nurse-administered tailored behavioral intervention; (3) nurse-administered medication management according to a hypertension decision support system; (4) combination of the 2 interventions. The interventions are triggered based on home BP values transmitted via telemonitoring devices over standard telephone lines. The tailored behavioral intervention involves promoting adherence with medication and health behaviors. Patients randomized to the medication management or the combined arm have their hypertension regimen changed by the study team using a validated hypertension decision support system based on evidence-based hypertension treatment guidelines and individualized to patients' comorbid illnesses. The primary outcome is BP control: < or = 140/90 mm Hg (nondiabetic) and < or = 130/80 mm Hg (diabetics) measured at 6-month intervals over 18 months (4 total measurements). CONCLUSIONS: Given the increasing prevalence of hypertension and our inability to achieve adequate BP control using traditional models of care, testing novel interventions in patients' homes may improve access, quality, and outcomes.

Cabana, M. D., C. S. Rand, et al. (1999). "Why don't physicians follow clinical practice guidelines? A framework for improvement." Jama 282(15): 1458-65.
	CONTEXT: Despite wide promulgation, clinical practice guidelines have had limited effect on changing physician behavior. Little is known about the process and factors involved in changing physician practices in response to guidelines. OBJECTIVE: To review barriers to physician adherence to clinical practice guidelines. DATA SOURCES: We searched the MEDLINE, Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC), and HealthSTAR databases (January 1966 to January 1998); bibliographies; textbooks on health behavior or public health; and references supplied by experts to find English-language article titles that describe barriers to guideline adherence. STUDY SELECTION: Of 5658 articles initially identified, we selected 76 published studies describing at least 1 barrier to adherence to clinical practice guidelines, practice parameters, clinical policies, or national consensus statements. One investigator screened titles to identify candidate articles, then 2 investigators independently reviewed the texts to exclude articles that did not match the criteria. Differences were resolved by consensus with a third investigator. DATA EXTRACTION: Two investigators organized barriers to adherence into a framework according to their effect on physician knowledge, attitudes, or behavior. This organization was validated by 3 additional investigators. DATA SYNTHESIS: The 76 articles included 120 different surveys investigating 293 potential barriers to physician guideline adherence, including awareness (n = 46), familiarity(n = 31), agreement (n = 33), self-efficacy (n = 19), outcome expectancy (n = 8), ability to overcome the inertia of previous practice (n = 14), and absence of external barriers to perform recommendations (n = 34). The majority of surveys (70 [58%] of 120) examined only 1 type of barrier. CONCLUSIONS: Studies on improving physician guideline adherence may not be generalizable, since barriers in one setting may not be present in another. Our review offers a differential diagnosis for why physicians do not follow practice guidelines, as well as a rational approach toward improving guideline adherence and a framework for future research.

Chan, A. S., R. W. Coleman, et al. (2004). "Evaluating provider adherence in a trial of a guideline-based decision support system for hypertension." Medinfo 11(Pt 1): 125-9.
	Measurement of provider adherence to a guideline-based decision support system (DSS) presents a number of important challenges. Establishing a causal relationship between the DSS and change in concordance requires consideration of both the primary intention of the guideline and different ways providers attempt to satisfy the guideline. During our work with a guideline-based decision support system for hypertension, ATHENA DSS, we document a number of subtle deviations from the strict hypertension guideline recommendations that ultimately demonstrate provider adherence. We believe that understanding these complexities is crucial to any valid evaluation of provider adherence. We also describe the development of an advisory evaluation engine that automates the interpretation of clinician adherence with the DSS on multiple levels, facilitating the high volume of complex data analysis that is created in a clinical trial of a guideline-based DSS.

Chan, A. S., R. D. Shankar, et al. (2005). "Leveraging point-of-care clinician feedback to study barriers to guideline adherence." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 915.
	Studies of barriers to guideline adherence have generally surveyed clinicians temporally remote from the clinical scenario in which recommendations were delivered, potentially adversely biasing clinician observations. The user interface of ATHENA DSS, a guideline-based decision support system for hypertension, includes a point-of-care feedback window that accepts clinician-user comments during the display of recommendations. Analysis of this feedback has revealed a number of intriguing patient, provider, and technical barriers to adherence collected during real-time system use.

Chan, A. S., R. D. Shankar, et al. (2005). "Leveraging point-of-care clinician feedback to study barriers to guideline adherence." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 915.
	Studies of barriers to guideline adherence have generally surveyed clinicians temporally remote from the clinical scenario in which recommendations were delivered, potentially adversely biasing clinician observations. The user interface of ATHENA DSS, a guideline-based decision support system for hypertension, includes a point-of-care feedback window that accepts clinician-user comments during the display of recommendations. Analysis of this feedback has revealed a number of intriguing patient, provider, and technical barriers to adherence collected during real-time system use.

Das, A. K., B. A. Ahmed, et al. (2006). "Knowledge-based method for building patient decision-analytic tools." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 175-9.
	Numerous health decision aids (HDAs) have been developed to increase the participation of patients in shared decision-making, but many have limited accessibility and narrow applicability in clinical care. In the Health e-Decision project, we address these limitations in our work on building general HDAs targeted for older adults. Our approach uses a decision-support software architecture that enables principled methods for HDAs. We have formalized a novel knowledge-based decision model (KBDM), using Protege OWL, that developers and clinicians can instantiate to tailor the components of the architecture for a particular health problem. In this paper, we present the methods used in the architecture and the knowledgebase design; the latter encompasses influence-diagram concepts, specific health problems, health outcome states, and probabilistic relationships. We discuss how this approach improves upon prior HDA methods. We also show that our use of computer-interpretable knowledge provides a structured, customizable means of enabling patient-centered decision support.

Goldstein, M. and B. Hoffman (2003). Hypertension Record Keeping and Electronic Management Systems Hypertension Primer I. JL and B. HR. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins: 393-396.
	
Goldstein, M. K., R. W. Coleman, et al. (2004). "Translating research into practice: organizational issues in implementing automated decision support for hypertension in three medical centers." J Am Med Inform Assoc 11(5): 368-76.
	Information technology can support the implementation of clinical research findings in practice settings. Technology can address the quality gap in health care by providing automated decision support to clinicians that integrates guideline knowledge with electronic patient data to present real-time, patient-specific recommendations. However, technical success in implementing decision support systems may not translate directly into system use by clinicians. Successful technology integration into clinical work settings requires explicit attention to the organizational context. We describe the application of a "sociotechnical" approach to integration of ATHENA DSS, a decision support system for the treatment of hypertension, into geographically dispersed primary care clinics. We applied an iterative technical design in response to organizational input and obtained ongoing endorsements of the project by the organization's administrative and clinical leadership. Conscious attention to organizational context at the time of development, deployment, and maintenance of the system was associated with extensive clinician use of the system.

Goldstein, M. K., B. B. Hoffman, et al. (2000). "Implementing clinical practice guidelines while taking account of changing evidence: ATHENA DSS, an easily modifiable decision-support system for managing hypertension in primary care." Proc AMIA Symp: 300-4.
	This paper describes the ATHENA Decision Support System (DSS), which operationalizes guidelines for hypertension using the EON architecture. ATHENA DSS encourages blood pressure control and recommends guideline-concordant choice of drug therapy in relation to comorbid diseases. ATHENA DSS has an easily modifiable knowledge base that specifies eligibility criteria, risk stratification, blood pressure targets, relevant comorbid diseases, guideline-recommended drug classes for patients with comorbid disease, preferred drugs within each drug class, and clinical messages. Because evidence for best management of hypertension evolves continually, ATHENA DSS is designed to allow clinical experts to customize the knowledge base to incorporate new evidence or to reflect local interpretations of guideline ambiguities. Together with its database mediator Athenaeum, ATHENA DSS has physical and logical data independence from the legacy Computerized Patient Record System (CPRS) supplying the patient data, so it can be integrated into a variety of electronic medical record systems.

Goldstein, M. K., B. B. Hoffman, et al. (2001). "Patient safety in guideline-based decision support for hypertension management: ATHENA DSS." Proc AMIA Symp: 214-8.
	The Institute of Medicine recently issued a landmark report on medical error.1 In the penumbra of this report, every aspect of health care is subject to new scrutiny regarding patient safety. Informatics technology can support patient safety by correcting problems inherent in older technology; however, new information technology can also contribute to new sources of error. We report here a categorization of possible errors that may arise in deploying a system designed to give guideline-based advice on prescribing drugs, an approach to anticipating these errors in an automated guideline system, and design features to minimize errors and thereby maximize patient safety. Our guideline implementation system, based on the EON architecture, provides a framework for a knowledge base that is sufficiently comprehensive to incorporate safety information, and that is easily reviewed and updated by clinician-experts.

Goldstein, M. K., P. Lavori, et al. (2005). "Improving adherence to guidelines for hypertension drug prescribing: cluster-randomized controlled trial of general versus patient-specific recommendations." Am J Manag Care 11(11): 677-85.
	OBJECTIVE: To determine whether an intervention focusing clinician attention on drug choice for hypertension treatment improves concordance between drug regimens and guidelines. STUDY DESIGN: Cluster-randomized controlled trial comparing an individualized intervention with a general guideline implementation in geographically diverse primary care clinics of a university-affiliated Department of Veterans Affairs healthcare system. METHODS: Participants were 36 attending physicians and nurse practitioners (16 in the general group and 20 in the individualized group), with findings based on 4500 hypertensive patients. A general guideline implementation for all clinicians, including education about guideline-based drug recommendations and goals for adequacy of blood pressure control, was compared with addition of a printed individualized advisory sent to clinicians at each patient visit, indicating whether or not the patient's antihypertensive drug regimen was guideline concordant. We measured change from baseline to end point in the proportion of clinicians' patients whose drug therapy was guideline concordant. RESULTS: The individualized intervention resulted in an improvement in guideline concordance more than twice that observed for the general intervention (10.9% vs 3.8%, t = 2.796, P = .008). Bootstrap analysis showed that being in the individualized group increased the odds of concordance 1.5-fold (P = .025). The proportion of patients with adequate blood pressure control increased within each study group; however, the difference between groups was not significant. CONCLUSION: An individualized advisory regarding drug therapy for hypertension given to the clinician at each patient visit was more effective in changing clinician prescribing behavior than implementation of a general guideline.

Johnson, C. D., R. F. Zeiger, et al. (2006). "Task analysis of writing hospital admission orders: evidence of a problem-based approach." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 389-93.
	As part of a broader project to improve the usability of computerized physician order entry (CPOE) systems, we set out to study the cognitive tasks physicians undertake to write "admission orders" when admitting a patient to the hospital. In particular, we evaluate the hypothesis that physicians' mental model of diagnostic and therapeutic planning is problem based, whereas both paper-based ordering and CPOE are typically organized around functional categories of orders such as those reflected in the mnemonic ADCVAANDIML. A task analysis was performed which included think-aloud observations of physicians writing orders in clinical care settings and for fictional case-scenarios, as well as a semi-structured questionnaire. Our work finds core tasks of admitting a patient to hospital and conflicts between physicians' mental model and traditional ordering systems. Based on our study, we suggest improvements to traditional CPOE systems.

Judge, J., T. S. Field, et al. (2006). "Prescribers' responses to alerts during medication ordering in the long term care setting." J Am Med Inform Assoc 13(4): 385-90.
	OBJECTIVE: Computerized physician order entry with clinical decision support has been shown to improve medication safety in adult inpatients, but few data are available regarding its usefulness in the long-term care setting. The objective of this study was to examine opportunities for improving medication safety in that clinical setting by determining the proportion of medication orders that would generate a warning message to the prescriber via a computerized clinical decision support system and assessing the extent to which these alerts would affect prescribers' actions. DESIGN: The study was set within a randomized controlled trial of computerized clinical decision support conducted in the long-stay units of a large, academically-affiliated long-term care facility. In March 2002, a computer-based clinical decision support system (CDSS) was added to an existing computerized physician order entry (CPOE) system. Over a subsequent one-year study period, prescribers ordering drugs for residents on three resident-care units of the facility were presented with alerts; these alerts were not displayed to prescribers in the four control units. MEASUREMENTS: We assessed the frequency of drug orders associated with various categories of alerts across all participating units of the facility. To assess the impact of actually receiving an alert on prescriber behavior during drug ordering, we calculated separately for the intervention and control units the proportion of the alerts, within each category, that were followed by an appropriate action and estimated the relative risk of an appropriate action in the intervention units compared to the control units. RESULTS: During the 12 months of the study, there were 445 residents on the participating units of the facility, contributing 3,726 resident-months of observation time. During this period, 47,997 medication orders were entered through the CPOE system-approximately 9 medication orders per resident per month. 9,414 alerts were triggered (2.5 alerts per resident-month). The alert categories most often triggered were related to risks of central nervous system side-effects such as over-sedation (20%). Alerts for risk of drug-associated constipation (13%) or renal insufficiency/electrolyte imbalance (12%) were also common. Twelve percent of the alerts were related to orders for warfarin. Overall, prescribers who received alerts were only slightly more likely to take an appropriate action (relative risk 1.11, 95% confidence interval 1.00, 1.22). Alerts related to orders for warfarin or central nervous system side effects were most likely to engender an appropriate action, such as ordering a recommended laboratory test or canceling an ordered drug. CONCLUSION: Long-term care facilities must implement new system-level approaches with the potential to improve medication safety for their residents. The number of medication orders that triggered a warning message in this study suggests that CPOE with a clinical decision support system may represent one such tool. However, the relatively low rate of response to these alerts suggests that further refinements to such systems are required, and that their impact on medication errors and adverse drug events must be carefully assessed.

Judge, J., T. S. Field, et al. (2006). "Prescribers' responses to alerts during medication ordering in the long term care setting." J Am Med Inform Assoc 13(4): 385-90.
	OBJECTIVE: Computerized physician order entry with clinical decision support has been shown to improve medication safety in adult inpatients, but few data are available regarding its usefulness in the long-term care setting. The objective of this study was to examine opportunities for improving medication safety in that clinical setting by determining the proportion of medication orders that would generate a warning message to the prescriber via a computerized clinical decision support system and assessing the extent to which these alerts would affect prescribers' actions. DESIGN: The study was set within a randomized controlled trial of computerized clinical decision support conducted in the long-stay units of a large, academically-affiliated long-term care facility. In March 2002, a computer-based clinical decision support system (CDSS) was added to an existing computerized physician order entry (CPOE) system. Over a subsequent one-year study period, prescribers ordering drugs for residents on three resident-care units of the facility were presented with alerts; these alerts were not displayed to prescribers in the four control units. MEASUREMENTS: We assessed the frequency of drug orders associated with various categories of alerts across all participating units of the facility. To assess the impact of actually receiving an alert on prescriber behavior during drug ordering, we calculated separately for the intervention and control units the proportion of the alerts, within each category, that were followed by an appropriate action and estimated the relative risk of an appropriate action in the intervention units compared to the control units. RESULTS: During the 12 months of the study, there were 445 residents on the participating units of the facility, contributing 3,726 resident-months of observation time. During this period, 47,997 medication orders were entered through the CPOE system-approximately 9 medication orders per resident per month. 9,414 alerts were triggered (2.5 alerts per resident-month). The alert categories most often triggered were related to risks of central nervous system side-effects such as over-sedation (20%). Alerts for risk of drug-associated constipation (13%) or renal insufficiency/electrolyte imbalance (12%) were also common. Twelve percent of the alerts were related to orders for warfarin. Overall, prescribers who received alerts were only slightly more likely to take an appropriate action (relative risk 1.11, 95% confidence interval 1.00, 1.22). Alerts related to orders for warfarin or central nervous system side effects were most likely to engender an appropriate action, such as ordering a recommended laboratory test or canceling an ordered drug. CONCLUSION: Long-term care facilities must implement new system-level approaches with the potential to improve medication safety for their residents. The number of medication orders that triggered a warning message in this study suggests that CPOE with a clinical decision support system may represent one such tool. However, the relatively low rate of response to these alerts suggests that further refinements to such systems are required, and that their impact on medication errors and adverse drug events must be carefully assessed.

Kaboli, P. J., B. J. McClimon, et al. (2004). "Assessing the accuracy of computerized medication histories." Am J Manag Care 10(11 Pt 2): 872-7.
	OBJECTIVE: To determine the accuracy of computerized medication histories. STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional observational study. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study sample included 493 Department of Veterans Affairs primary care patients aged 65 years or older who were receiving at least 5 prescriptions. A semistructured interview confirmed medication, allergy, and adverse drug reaction (ADR) histories. Accuracy of the computerized medication lists was assessed, including omissions (medications not on the computer record) and commissions (medications on the computer record that were no longer being taken). Allergy and ADR records also were assessed. RESULTS: Patients were taking a mean of 12.4 medications: 65% prescription, 23% over-the-counter products, and 12% vitamins/herbals. There was complete agreement between the computer medication list and what the patient was taking for only 5.3% of patients. There were 3.1 drug omissions per patient, and 25% of the total number of medications taken by patients were omitted from the electronic medical record. There were 1.3 commissions per patient, and the patients were not taking 12.6% of all active medications on the computer profile. In addition, 23.2% of allergies and 63.9% of ADRs were not in the computerized record. CONCLUSIONS: Very few computerized medication histories were accurate. Inaccurate medication information may compromise patient care and limit the utility of medication databases for research and for assessment of the quality of prescribing and disease management.

Krall, M. A. and D. F. Sittig (2001). "Subjective assessment of usefulness and appropriate presentation mode of alerts and reminders in the outpatient setting." Proc AMIA Symp: 334-8.
	There is very little known about the limits of alerting in the setting of the outpatient Electronic Medical Record (EMR). We are interested in how users value and prefer such alerts. One hundred Kaiser Permanente primary care clinicians were sent a four-page questionnaire. It contained questions related to the usability and usefulness of different approaches to presenting reminder and alert information. The survey also contained questions about the desirability of six categories of alerts. Forty-three of 100 questionnaires were returned. Users generally preferred an active, more intrusive interaction model for "alerts" and a passive, less intrusive model for order messages and other types of reminders and notifications. Drug related alerts were more highly rated than health maintenance or disease state reminders. Users indicated that more alerts would make the system "more useful" but "less easy to use".

Krall, M. A. and D. F. Sittig (2002). "Clinician's assessments of outpatient electronic medical record alert and reminder usability and usefulness requirements." Proc AMIA Symp: 400-4.
	Electronic medical record alerts and reminders are increasingly employed as a means of decreasing medical errors and increasing the quality and cost-effectiveness of care. However, clinicians indicate that alerts and reminders can be either help or hindrance. Discerning the elements that determine which they will be, and the requirements of a helpful alert or reminder, was the focus of this study. We convened three focus groups, comprised of a total of 16 participants. During analysis, five themes emerged: Efficiency, Usefulness, Information Content, User Interface, and Workflow. In addition there were some New Ideas and Surprises. Specific usability and usefulness requirements emerged from within the themes and these are described.

Lin, N. D., S. B. Martins, et al. (2006). "Identifying barriers to hypertension guideline adherence using clinician feedback at the point of care." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 494-8.
	Factors contributing to low adherence to clinical guidelines by clinicians are not well understood. The user interface of ATHENA-HTN, a guideline-based decision support system (DSS) for hypertension, presents a novel opportunity to collect clinician feedback on recommendations displayed at the point of care. We analyzed feedback from 46 clinicians who received ATHENA advisories as part of a 15-month randomized trial to identify potential reasons clinicians may not intensify hypertension therapy when it is recommended. Among the 368 visits for which feedback was provided, clinicians commonly reported they did not follow recommendations because: recorded blood pressure was not representative of the patient's typical blood pressure; hypertension was not a clinical priority for the visit; or patients were nonadherent to medications. For many visits, current quality-assurance algorithms may incorrectly identify clinically appropriate decisions as guideline nonadherent due to incomplete capture of relevant information. We present recommendations for how automated DSSs may help identify "apparent" barriers and better target decision support.

Martins, S. B., S. Lai, et al. (2006). "Offline Testing of the ATHENA Hypertension Decision Support System Knowledge Base to Improve the Accuracy of Recommendations." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 539-43.
	ATHENA-HTN is a clinical decision support system (CDSS) that delivers guideline-based patient-specific recommendations about hypertension management at the time of clinical decision-making. The ATHENA-HTN knowledge is stored in a knowledge-base (KB). Changes in best-practice recommendations require updates to the KB. We describe a method of offline testing to evaluate the accuracy of recommendations generated from the KB. A physician reviewed 100 test cases and made drug recommendations based on guidelines and the "Rules" (descriptions of encoded knowledge). These drug recommendations were compared to those generated by ATHENA-HTN. Nineteen drug-recommendation discrepancies were identified: ATHENA-HTN was more complete in generating recommendations (15); ambiguities in the Rules misled the physician (3); and content in the Rules was not encoded (1). Three new boundaries were identified. Three updates were made to the KB based on the results. The offline testing method was successful in identifying areas for KB improvement and led to improved accuracy of guideline-based recommendations.

Maviglia, S. M., R. D. Zielstorff, et al. (2003). "Automating complex guidelines for chronic disease: lessons learned." J Am Med Inform Assoc 10(2): 154-65.
	There is scant published experience with implementing complex, multistep computerized practice guidelines for the long-term management of chronic diseases. We have implemented a system for creating, maintaining, and navigating computer-based clinical algorithms integrated with our electronic medical record. This article describes our progress and reports on lessons learned that might guide future work in this field. We discuss issues and obstacles related to choosing and adapting a guideline for electronic implementation, representing and executing the guideline as a computerized algorithm, and integrating it into the clinical workflow of outpatient care. Although obstacles were encountered at each of these steps, the most difficult were related to workflow integration.

Michel M., T. J., Martins SB, Wang D., Tu S., 
Johnson NA, Goldstein MK. (2008). "Improving Patient Safety using ATHENA-Decision Support System Technology: Opioid Therapy for Chronic Pain." Advances in Patient Safety: From Research to Implementation.
: Rockville, MD, AHRQ.
.
	
Michel, M. C. (CHCE September 18th 2007). "ATHENA DSS - From Hypertension 
to Managing Opioid Therapy for Chronic Pain, a progress report."
	
Roumie, C. L., T. A. Elasy, et al. (2006). "Improving blood pressure control through provider education, provider alerts, and patient education: a cluster randomized trial." Ann Intern Med 145(3): 165-75.
	BACKGROUND: Inadequate blood pressure control is a persistent gap in quality care. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate provider and patient interventions to improve blood pressure control. DESIGN: Cluster randomized, controlled trial. SETTING: 2 hospital-based and 8 community-based clinics in the Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System. PATIENTS: 1341 veterans with essential hypertension cared for by 182 providers. Eligible patients had 2 or more blood pressure measurements greater than 140/90 mm Hg in a 6-month period and were taking a single antihypertensive agent. INTERVENTION: Providers who cared for eligible patients were randomly assigned to receive an e-mail with a Web-based link to the Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7) guidelines (provider education); provider education and a patient-specific hypertension computerized alert (provider education and alert); or provider education, hypertension alert, and patient education, in which patients were sent a letter advocating drug adherence, lifestyle modification, and conversations with providers (patient education). MEASUREMENTS: Proportion of patients with a systolic blood pressure less than 140 mm Hg at 6 months; intensification of antihypertensive medication. RESULTS: Mean baseline blood pressure was 157/83 mm Hg with no differences between groups (P = 0.105). Six-month follow-up data were available for 975 patients (73%). Patients of providers who were randomly assigned to the patient education group had better blood pressure control (138/75 mm Hg) than those in the provider education and alert or provider education alone groups (146/76 mm Hg and 145/78 mm Hg, respectively). More patients in the patient education group had a systolic blood pressure of 140 mm Hg or less compared with those in the provider education or provider education and alert groups (adjusted relative risk for the patient education group compared with the provider education alone group, 1.31 [95% CI, 1.06 to 1.62]; P = 0.012). LIMITATIONS: Follow-up blood pressure measurements were missing for 27% of study patients. The study could not detect a mechanism by which patient education improved blood pressure control. CONCLUSIONS: A multifactorial intervention including patient education improved blood pressure control compared with provider education alone.

Shalom, E., Y. Shahar, et al. (2008). "A quantitative assessment of a methodology for collaborative specification and evaluation of clinical guidelines." J Biomed Inform.
	We introduce a three-phase, nine-step methodology for specification of clinical guidelines (GLs) by expert physicians, clinical editors, and knowledge engineers and for quantitative evaluation of the specification's quality. We applied this methodology to a particular framework for incremental GL structuring (mark-up) and to GLs in three clinical domains. A gold-standard mark-up was created, including 196 plans and subplans, and 326 instances of ontological knowledge roles (KRs). A completeness measure of the acquired knowledge revealed that 97% of the plans and 91% of the KR instances of the GLs were recreated by the clinical editors. A correctness measure often revealed high variability within clinical editor pairs structuring each GL, but for all GLs and clinical editors the specification quality was significantly higher than random (p<0.01). Procedural KRs were more difficult to mark-up than declarative KRs. We conclude that given an ontology-specific consensus, clinical editors with mark-up training can structure GL knowledge with high completeness, whereas the main demand for correct structuring is training in the ontology's semantics.

Shankar, R. D., S. B. Martins, et al. (2001). "Building an explanation function for a hypertension decision-support system." Medinfo 10(Pt 1): 538-42.
	ATHENA DSS is a decision-support system that provides recommendations for managing hypertension in primary care. ATHENA DSS is built on a component-based architecture called EON. User acceptance of a system like this one depends partly on how well the system explains its reasoning and justifies its conclusions. We addressed this issue by adapting WOZ, a declarative explanation framework, to build an explanation function for ATHENA DSS. ATHENA DSS is built based on a component-based architecture called EON. The explanation function obtains its information by tapping into EON's components, as well as into other relevant sources such as the guideline document and medical literature. It uses an argument model to identify the pieces of information that constitute an explanation, and employs a set of visual clients to display that explanation. By incorporating varied information sources, by mirroring naturally occurring medical arguments and by utilizing graphic visualizations, ATHENA DSS's explanation function generates rich, evidence-based explanations.

Shankar, R. D., S. W. Tu, et al. (2001). "Integration of textual guideline documents with formal guideline knowledge bases." Proc AMIA Symp: 617-21.
	Numerous approaches have been proposed to integrate the text of guideline documents with guideline-based care systems. Current approaches range from serving marked up guideline text documents to generating advisories using complex guideline knowledge bases. These approaches have integration problems mainly because they tend to rigidly link the knowledge base with text. We are developing a bridge approach that uses an information retrieval technology. The new approach facilitates a versatile decision-support system by using flexible links between the formal structures of the knowledge base and the natural language style of the guideline text.

Shiffman, R. N., P. Shekelle, et al. (2003). "Standardized reporting of clinical practice guidelines: a proposal from the Conference on Guideline Standardization." Ann Intern Med 139(6): 493-8.
	Despite enormous energies invested in authoring clinical practice guidelines, the quality of individual guidelines varies considerably. The Conference on Guideline Standardization (COGS) was convened in April 2002 to define a standard for guideline reporting that would promote guideline quality and facilitate implementation. Twenty-three people with expertise and experience in guideline development, dissemination, and implementation participated. A list of candidate guideline components was assembled from the Institute of Medicine Provisional Instrument for Assessing Clinical Guidelines, the National Guideline Clearinghouse, the Guideline Elements Model, and other published guideline models. In a 2-stage modified Delphi process, panelists first rated their agreement with the statement that "[Item name] is a necessary component of practice guidelines" on a 9-point scale. An individualized report was prepared for each panelist; the report summarized the panelist's rating for each item and the median and dispersion of rankings of all the panelists. In a second round, panelists separately rated necessity for validity and necessity for practical application. Items achieving a median rank of 7 or higher on either scale, with low disagreement index, were retained as necessary guideline components. Representatives of 22 organizations active in guideline development reviewed the proposed items and commented favorably. Closely related items were consolidated into 18 topics to create the COGS checklist. This checklist provides a framework to support more comprehensive documentation of practice guidelines. Most organizations that are active in guideline development found the component items to be comprehensive and to fit within their existing development methods.

Siegel, D., J. Lopez, et al. (2003). "Academic detailing to improve antihypertensive prescribing patterns." Am J Hypertens 16(6): 508-11.
	Several studies indicate that treatment of hypertension in the United States does not follow recommendations from expert bodies. We thus implemented a program using academic detailers to increase practitioner compliance with antihypertensive treatment guidelines. Five Veterans Affairs medical facilities including academic medical centers and community based outpatient clinics were chosen for the intervention. Pharmacists were trained as academic detailers, and the intervention included lectures, educational materials, provider profiling, and meetings with 25 to 50 providers each. After intervention, the proportion of hypertensives receiving calcium antagonists decreased from 43% to 38% (P <.001), whereas the proportion receiving a beta blocker or thiazide diuretic increased from 58% to 64% (P <.001). For hypertensive subjects with diabetes mellitus or congestive heart failure, the proportion receiving an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker increased from 72% to 76% for the former and from 74% to 78% for the latter (P <.001 for both). Among hypertensive subjects with coronary artery disease an increase in beta blocker use was noted after intervention (P <.001 for change from baseline). Prescribing patterns after academic detailing more closely followed national recommendations.

Sittig, D. F., M. A. Krall, et al. (2006). "A survey of factors affecting clinician acceptance of clinical decision support." BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 6: 6.
	BACKGROUND: Real-time clinical decision support (CDS) integrated into clinicians' workflow has the potential to profoundly affect the cost, quality, and safety of health care delivery. Recent reports have identified a surprisingly low acceptance rate for different types of CDS. We hypothesized that factors affecting CDS system acceptance could be categorized as relating to differences in patients, physicians, CDS-type, or environmental characteristics. METHODS: We conducted a survey of all adult primary care physicians (PCPs, n = 225) within our group model Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) to identify factors that affect their acceptance of CDS. We defined clinical decision support broadly as "clinical information" that is either provided to you or accessible by you, from the clinical workstation (e.g., enhanced flow sheet displays, health maintenance reminders, alternative medication suggestions, order sets, alerts, and access to any internet-based information resources). RESULTS: 110 surveys were returned (49%). There were no differences in the age, gender, or years of service between those who returned the survey and the entire adult PCP population. Overall, clinicians stated that the CDS provided "helps them take better care of their patients" (3.6 on scale of 1:Never-5:Always), "is worth the time it takes" (3.5), and "reminds them of something they've forgotten" (3.2). There was no difference in the perceived acceptance rate of alerts based on their type (i.e., cost, safety, health maintenance). When asked about specific patient characteristics that would make the clinicians "more", "equally" or "less" likely to accept alerts: 41% stated that they were more (8% stated "less") likely to accept alerts on elderly patients (> 65 yrs); 38% were more (14% stated less) likely to accept alerts on patients with more than 5 current medications; and 38% were more (20% stated less) likely to accept alerts on patients with more than 5 chronic clinical conditions. Interestingly, 80% said they were less likely to accept alerts when they were behind schedule and 84% of clinicians admitted to being at least 20 minutes behind schedule "some", "most", or "all of the time". CONCLUSION: Even though a majority of our clinical decision support suggestions are not explicitly followed, clinicians feel they are of benefit and would be even more beneficial if they had more time available to address them.

Steinman, M. A., M. A. Fischer, et al. (2004). "Clinician awareness of adherence to hypertension guidelines." Am J Med 117(10): 747-54.
	PURPOSE: Little is known about how well clinicians are aware of their own adherence to clinical guidelines, an important indicator of quality. We compared clinicians' beliefs about their adherence to hypertension guidelines with data on their actual performance. METHODS: We surveyed 139 primary care clinicians at three Veterans Affairs medical centers, asking them to assess their own adherence to hypertension guidelines. We then extracted data from the centers' clinical databases on guideline-concordant medication use and blood pressure control for patients cared for by these providers during a 6-month period. Data were collected for patients with hypertension and diabetes, hypertension and coronary disease, or hypertension with neither of these comorbid conditions. RESULTS: Eighty-six clinicians (62%) completed the survey. Each clinician saw a median of 94 patients with hypertension (mean age, 65 years). Patients were treated with an average of 1.6 antihypertensive medications. Overall, clinicians overestimated the proportion of their patients who were prescribed guideline-concordant medications (75% perceived vs. 67% actual, P <0.001) and who had blood pressure levels <140/90 mm Hg on their last visit (68% perceived vs. 43% actual, P <0.001). Among individual clinicians, there were no significant correlations between perceived and actual guideline adherence (r = 0.18 for medications, r = 0.14 for blood pressure control; P > or =0.10 for both). Clinicians with relatively low actual guideline performance were most likely to overestimate their adherence to medication recommendations and blood pressure targets. CONCLUSION: Clinicians appear to overestimate their adherence to hypertension guidelines, particularly with regards to the proportion of their patients with controlled blood pressure. This limited awareness may represent a barrier to successful implementation of guidelines, and could be addressed through the use of provider profiles and point-of-service feedback to clinicians.

Szeto, H. C., R. K. Coleman, et al. (2002). "Accuracy of computerized outpatient diagnoses in a Veterans Affairs general medicine clinic." Am J Manag Care 8(1): 37-43.
	BACKGROUND: Electronically available data, both administrative, such as outpatient encounter diagnostic data, and clinical, such as problem lists, are being used increasingly for outcome and quality assessment, risk adjustment, and clinical reminder systems. OBJECTIVE: To determine the accuracy of outpatient primary care diagnostic information recorded in administrative and clinical files in a Veterans Affairs VISTA (Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture) database compared with medical chart notes. STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional medical chart review of 148 patients attending a general medicine clinic at a university-affiliated Veterans Affairs hospital for 9 diagnoses relevant to the choice of drug therapy for hypertension. PATIENTS AND METHODS: An administrative file of encounter diagnoses, for a 2-year period, and a clinical file of the problem list maintained by the clinician were the sources of electronic diagnoses. We compared these sources with diagnoses abstracted by medical chart review. We estimated the sensitivity and specificity of each electronic data source for detecting medical chart note diagnoses. RESULTS: The sensitivity for 8 of the 9 study diagnoses was greater than 80% in the administrative file and 49% in the clinical problem list. The specificity was good for the administrative file (91% to 100%) and even better for the clinical file (98% to 100%). CONCLUSIONS: Outpatient encounter diagnoses relevant to hypertension recorded as electronic data had high specificity, and some codes had high sensitivity when collected over multiple visits. The administrative file was more sensitive but less specific than the clinical file. Administrative vs clinical files can be selected to minimize either the false-negative or the false-positive designations, respectively, as dictated by the needs of the quality assessment review.

Tu, S. W., K. M. Hrabak, et al. (2006). "Use of declarative statements in creating and maintaining computer-interpretable knowledge bases for guideline-based care." AMIA Annu Symp Proc: 784-8.
	Developing computer-interpretable clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) to provide decision support for guideline-based care is an extremely labor-intensive task. In the EON/ATHENA and SAGE projects, we formulated substantial portions of CPGs as computable statements that express declarative relationships between patient conditions and possible interventions. We developed query and expression languages that allow a decision-support system (DSS) to evaluate these statements in specific patient situations. A DSS can use these guideline statements in multiple ways, including: (1) as inputs for determining preferred alternatives in decision-making, and (2) as a way to provide targeted commentaries in the clinical information system. The use of these declarative statements significantly reduces the modeling expertise and effort required to create and maintain computer-interpretable knowledge bases for decision-support purpose. We discuss possible implications for sharing of such knowledge bases.

Tu, S. W., M. A. Musen, et al. (2004). "Modeling guidelines for integration into clinical workflow." Medinfo 11(Pt 1): 174-8.
	The success of clinical decision-support systems requires that they are seamlessly integrated into clinical workflow. In the SAGE project, which aims to create the technological infra-structure for implementing computable clinical practice guide-lines in enterprise settings, we created a deployment-driven methodology for developing guideline knowledge bases. It involves (1) identification of usage scenarios of guideline-based care in clinical workflow, (2) distillation and disambiguation of guideline knowledge relevant to these usage scenarios, (3) formalization of data elements and vocabulary used in the guideline, and (4) encoding of usage scenarios and guideline knowledge using an executable guideline model. This methodology makes explicit the points in the care process where guideline-based decision aids are appropriate and the roles of clinicians for whom the guideline-based assistance is intended. We have evaluated the methodology by simulating the deployment of an immunization guideline in a real clinical information system and by reconstructing the workflow context of a deployed decision-support system for guideline-based care. We discuss the implication of deployment-driven guideline encoding for sharability of executable guidelines.

Walsh, J. M., V. Sundaram, et al. (2008). "Implementing effective hypertension quality improvement strategies: barriers and potential solutions." J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 10(4): 311-6.
	Many quality improvement strategies have focused on improving blood pressure control, and these strategies can target the patient, the provider, and/or the system. Strategies that seem to have the biggest effect on blood pressure outcomes are team change, patient education, facilitated relay of clinical information, and promotion of self-management. Barriers to effective blood pressure control can affect the patient, the physician, the system, and/or "cues to action."We review the barriers to achieving blood pressure control and describe current and potential creative strategies for optimizing blood pressure control. These include home-based disease management, combined patient and provider education, and automatic decision support systems. Future research must address which components of quality improvement interventions are most successful in achieving blood pressure control.

Young, A. S., E. Chaney, et al. (2007). "Information technology to support improved care for chronic illness." J Gen Intern Med 22 Suppl 3: 425-30.
	BACKGROUND: In populations with chronic illness, outcomes improve with the use of care models that integrate clinical information, evidence-based treatments, and proactive management of care. Health information technology is believed to be critical for efficient implementation of these chronic care models. Health care organizations have implemented information technologies, such as electronic medical records, to varying degrees. However, considerable uncertainty remains regarding the relative impact of specific informatics technologies on chronic illness care. OBJECTIVE: To summarize knowledge and increase expert consensus regarding informatics components that support improvement in chronic illness care. DESIGN: A systematic review of the literature was performed. "Use case" models were then developed, based on the literature review, and guidance from clinicians and national quality improvement projects. A national expert panel process was conducted to increase consensus regarding information system components that can be used to improve chronic illness care. RESULTS: The expert panel agreed that informatics should be patient-centered, focused on improving outcomes, and provide support for illness self-management. They concurred that outcomes should be routinely assessed, provided to clinicians during the clinical encounter, and used for population-based care management. It was recommended that interactive, sequential, disorder-specific treatment pathways be implemented to quickly provide clinicians with patient clinical status, treatment history, and decision support. CONCLUSIONS: Specific informatics strategies have the potential to improve care for chronic illness. Software to implement these strategies should be developed, and rigorously evaluated within the context of organizational efforts to improve care.

