ACP Journal Club
Ramipril reduced long-term mortality after MI
ISSN: 12345678Accession: 00021607-199711000-00001
Issue:Volume 127, Nov-Dec 1997, p 57

Publication Type:[Therapeutics]

Publisher:Copyright (C) 1997 American College of Physicians.  All Rights
Reserved.

Institution(s):Evidence-Based Medicine. 1997 Nov-Dec;2:174.
Source of funding: Hoechst Marion Roussel.
For article reprint: Dr. A.S. Hall, Institute for Cardiovascular Research, The
Yorkshire Heart Centre, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, England, UK. FAX
44-113-233-4803.

Source Reference:Abstract and Commentary for: Hall AS, Murray GD, Ball SG, on
behalf of the AIREX Study Investigators. Follow-up study of patients randomly
allocated to ramipril or placebo for heart failure after acute myocardial
infarction: AIRE Extension (AIREX) Study. Lancet. 1997 May 24;349:1493-7.

Keywords: ACE - angiotensin converting enzyme, ACE inhibitors, ACE level, Acute
MI, Acute myocardial infarction, Acute pulmonary edema, AMI - acute myocardial
infarction, Angiotensin converting enzyme, Angiotensin I-converting enzyme
inhibitors, Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition, B-adrenergic blockade,
B-blockade, B-blockers, Beta blocker, Biventricular failure, Carboxycathepsin,
Cardiac failure, Cardiogenic pulmonary edema, CHF, Chronic heart failure,
Congestive failure, Congestive heart failure, Converting enzyme inhibitors,
Depressed left ventricular function, Dipeptidyl peptidase A, Heart attack, Heart
failure, Kininase A, Kininase II inhibitors, Left heart failure, Left ventricular
dysfunction, Left ventricular failure, MI - myocardial infarction, Myocardial
failure, Myocardial infarction, Peptidase p, Peptidyl-dipeptidase A, Postoperative
MI, Pulmonary edema, Q-wave infarctions, Q-wave myocardial infarction, Ramipril,
Severe congestive heart failure, Severe heart failure, Systolic dysfunction,
Ventricular dysfunction, Wet lung

----------------------------------------------

Outline

  Abstract

  Commentary

  References

  Footnotes

Abstract

Objective: To determine the long-term survival benefit of ramipril for
congestive heart failure (CHF) after myocardial infarction (MI).

Design: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with 3-year follow-up
after the end of the study.

Setting: 30 clinical centers in the United Kingdom.

Patients: 603 patients (mean age 65 y, 75% men) with confirmed MI complicated by
CHF defined as left ventricular failure on erect posteroanterior chest
radiograph, auscultatory evidence of pulmonary edema, or a third heart sound
plus persistent tachycardia. Exclusion criteria were clinical instability,
contraindications to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, heart
failure of primary valvular or congenital origin, or overt CHF that required ACE
inhibitors. Follow-up was > 99% and 100% for death.

Intervention: Treatment was started 2 to 9 days after MI. 302 patients were
allocated to ramipril, 1.25 to 2.5 mg twice daily titrated up to 2.5 to 5.0 mg
twice daily, and 301 patients were allocated to placebo. Overt CHF was treated
with open-label ACE inhibitors. At the end of the 15-month study, patients
stopped their double-blind assigned medication and were treated at the
discretion of their physicians. 

Main outcome measure: Total mortality 3 years after the end of the trial.

Main results: At discharge from the hospital, 13.7% of patients allocated to
ramipril and 5.3% of patients allocated to placebo were not taking their
assigned medication. 3 years after the end of the study (minimum follow-up of 42
mo, mean 59 mo), 83 deaths (28%) had occurred in the ramipril group and 117
deaths (39%) had occurred in the placebo group (P = 0.002) (Table).

Ramipril vs placebo for congestive heart failure*: 

Outcome at mean 59 mo

Death

Ramipril EER:28%

Placebo CER:39%

RRR (95% CI):36% (15 to 52)

ARR |EER-CER|:11%

NNT (CI):9 (5 to 26)

Conclusion: Ramipril reduced long-term mortality in patients with congestive
heart failure after myocardial infarction.

----------------------------------------------

Commentary

[beta]-blocker therapy is standard after MI. The original studies showed a
short-term mortality benefit (1). It was not until the 7-year follow-up of the
Norwegian timolol study (2) that this benefit was shown to be maintained over
time. The same kind of information is now available on the use of ACE inhibitors
in the treatment of patients with CHF after MI. 

The Survival and Ventricular (SAVE) (3) and International Study of Infarct
Survival (ISIS-4) (4) trials showed that the judicious use of these drugs
several days after MI decreased the short-term mortality rate. Such studies as
the Studies of Left Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD) trial (5), which showed the
benefit of these drugs in CHF without acute MI, did not reveal a link between
the timing of the start of therapy to the onset of congestive symptoms.
Combining these 2 ideas would suggest to the clinician that patients with acute
MI who developed CHF would benefit from long-term treatment.

 The study by Hall and colleagues directly addresses this issue by showing an
ongoing mortality benefit at 42 months when the ACE inhibitors were begun 2 to 9
days after MI. The 11% absolute risk reduction in mortality is even more
remarkable because any patient who developed CHF during follow-up was permitted
to receive an open-label ACE inhibitor. The drug was blindly compared with
placebo only during the first 15 months of the study. It is also important to
note that the magnitude of the survival benefit did not increase after 24
months, again perhaps because the use of ACE inhibitors was not restricted.

It took several years for ACE inhibitors to be widely used for CHF. Now we have
excellent data showing that these agents are highly beneficial in reducing
mortality in patients with CHF after MI in both the short and long term.

Robert S. Weiss, MD 

Androscoggin Cardiology Association 

Auburn, Maine, USA 

References

1. JAMA. 1982;247:1707-14

2. Pedersen TR. N Engl J Med. 1985;313: 1055-8. ExternalResolverBasic Bibliographic
Links

3. Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E, Moye LA, et al. N Engl J Med. 1992;327:669-77.

4. ISIS-4 (Fourth International Study of Infarct Survival) Collaborative Group.
Lancet. 1995;345:669-85. ExternalResolverBasic Bibliographic Links

5. The SOLVD Investigators. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:293-302.

Footnotes

*Abbreviations defined in Glossary; CI for NNT calculated from data in article.

Keywords: ACE - angiotensin converting enzyme; ACE inhibitors; ACE level; Acute
MI; Acute myocardial infarction; Acute pulmonary edema; AMI - acute myocardial
infarction; Angiotensin converting enzyme; Angiotensin I-converting enzyme
inhibitors; Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition; B-adrenergic blockade;
B-blockade; B-blockers; Beta blocker; Biventricular failure; Carboxycathepsin;
Cardiac failure; Cardiogenic pulmonary edema; CHF; Chronic heart failure;
Congestive failure; Congestive heart failure; Converting enzyme inhibitors;
Depressed left ventricular function; Dipeptidyl peptidase A; Heart attack; Heart
failure; Kininase A; Kininase II inhibitors; Left heart failure; Left ventricular
dysfunction; Left ventricular failure; MI - myocardial infarction; Myocardial
failure; Myocardial infarction; Peptidase p; Peptidyl-dipeptidase A; Postoperative
MI; Pulmonary edema; Q-wave infarctions; Q-wave myocardial infarction; Ramipril;
Severe congestive heart failure; Severe heart failure; Systolic dysfunction;
Ventricular dysfunction; Wet lung

